#+TITLE: Chapter 2: Rule Based Carry and Momentum Investment

This chapter is about the effectiveness of applying simple rules to
the carry investment. The carry trade will be defined, a "benchmark"
established, and finally rule based carry strategies will be discussed
to improve returns and reduce risk.

A *carry trade* broadly means receiving returns from holding (/going
long/) on asset against borrowing (/shorting/) another asset. An example
with interest rates: Borrow at low rates and lend or receive long-term
rates such as 30-year rates, assuming an upward sloping yield
curve. This is known as a *positive carry* because the net position is
profitable to hold. The inverse position of receiving short-term rates
and paying long-term rates is *negative carry* because it is held at a
loss. Negative carry, similar to shorting a stock, is a speculative
high-risk strategy where the expectation of a dramatic repricing of
assets would compensate for the losses of passively holding an
unprofitable position. The chapter focuses on the positive carry.

In financial markets, carry trade is generally understood to refer to
investments in currency markets in which you borrow in currencies with
low interest rates to buy and hold different currencies with high
interest rates. It is essentially interest rate arbitrage between
currency pairs. The investment will be profitable as long as target
currency does not weaken against funding currency too greatly to erase
the interest rate differential.

* "Benchmark" Returns in the FX Carry Trade

A benchmark currency carry investment is needed to illustrate in
greater detail the profitability vs the risk of investing in the
simplest form of the carry strategy.

The *rule* is that one the monthly basis, you create an equally weighted
basket such that if the interest rate of the foreign currency is
higher than the US rate, you borrow 1 USD and buy and hold the foreign
currency for a month. If the interest rate of the foreign currency is
lower than the US rate, you borrow 1 USD worth of foreign currency and
buy and hold the USD for a month. You receive the net interest rates
for holding the position.

From January 2001 to June 2013, 6 out of the 9 currency carry trades
in the book outperformed the S&P 500. The Sharpe ratio of the returns
are higher and the returns are less skewed (where skew tells us that
if the market goes down, the value of an asset also goes down to an
even greater degree). Moreover, returns of carry trades are relatively
uncorrelated with returns from other risky assets such as the S&P 500.

* The Risks of the FX Carry Trade

[[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fpK36FZmTFY][What risks? We didn't see any risks, did we Charlie?]]

The risk that underlies the average excess returns of 3.5% with a
Sharpe ratio exceeding that of the S&P of the carry trade is that
exchange rates can move in a volatile and dramatic fashion.

* The Steam Roller

Warren Buffet once said that the carry trade is like picking up the
nickels before the steam roller. Popular carry trades have become
highly correlated with other risky assets, such as the S&P 500 and the
U.S. high yield credit market, and correlation tends to further
increase during a crisis.

* Simple yet Effective Rules for Carry Investment

Faced with the threat of an approaching steam roller, what is needed
is an early alert system.

1. Use diversification across currencies
2. Use VIX (implied volatility of S&P 500 options) as a market indicator of trouble
3. Use a simple momentum strategy as a hedge against carry

** Diversification

Instead of choosing a single currency pair, you build a diversified
carry portfolio with the 9 most liquid currencies (G9) against the
USD. Buy currencies with positive carry, sell those with negative
carry against the USD and hold the positions for a month.

From Jan '01 to Jan '13, the simple diversified carry portfolio (equal
weighting) had a Sharpe ratio of 0.62, 50% higher than the average of
individual carry trades.

Another way is to buy the top 3 currencies with the highest interest
rate differential and sell equal amounts of the bottom 3 currencies
with the lowest interest differential. Even if a currency has a
positive interest rate differential against the USD, if its among the
lowest, you still sell it. The long 3/short 3 carry portfolio can
obtain a Sharpe ratio of 0.7.

** VIX: Reading Market Indicators to Avoid the Steam Roller

It is easy to observe the behavior of the options market as an
indicator for risk. Options trading is heavily quantitative, and
options desks are well equipped to detect the slightest change in risk
sentiment and act quickly at the slightest hint of trouble.

When there is a spike in implied volatility, it means that the "fast
money" is uneasy and nervous. High implied volatility is a warning to
approach the market with caution.

You can implement the VIX filter through rules that switch the carry
trade on and off conditional to the VIX. You invest in the 9 most
liquid currencies (G9) against the USD. Once each month you look at
the level of the VIC that prevailed at the close of the previous
trading day. If the level of the VIX the day before is higher than the
90th percentile of the past year's VIX levels, you do not enter a
carry trade, otherwise you do enter.

The results are quite nice:


#+DOWNLOADED: screenshot @ 2022-09-03 07:11:55
[[file:Simple_yet_Effective_Rules_for_Carry_Investment/2022-09-03_07-11-55_screenshot.png]]

Other indicators can also be used for risk on/off signaling:

- the TED spread
- currency-specific volatility indices
  - such as JP Morgan's Global FX Volatility Index
- credit spreads
- the slope of the yield curve

** Momentum Strategy as a Hedge for Carry Investment

A momentum strategy simply means buying assets that have produced
positive returns in the past and selling those that have produced
negative returns. Numerous academic studies have found that the
momentum strategy is a good hedge for carry, not just for FX, but also
for other risky asset classes such as equities and commodities.

The major difference among all of the possible variations of momentum
strategies lies in the compression or representation of information
extracted from past price movement.

A popular momentum strategy for example is the /moving average cross-over/:

You select a short window (e.g. 5 days) and a long window (e.g. 200
days) moving average. Then, if the short-term moving average is higher
than the long-term moving average, a buy signal is generated.

The author passes the buck here, and states that there are countless
papers and books on momentum trading, so this book will focus on the
moving average cross-over:

Each month you go long those currencies against the USD whose 3 month
returns are higher than their one year returns, against selling those
currencies with a 3 month return lower than the one year return.

Importantly, the simple momentum portfolio constructed is negatively
correlated with the 2 diversified carry strategies (equally weighted
and long 3/short 3).

Using a mix of 50/50 long/short with momentum lead to a greater Sharpe
Ratio of 1.08.

* Some Remarks

What has been presented so far is only the most basic illustration of
building a rule based strategy. There are myriad ways to improve
results by employing additional rules and filters, such as using the
carry risk ratio, purchasing power parity, and changes in yield.
