#+TITLE: Chapter 3: Rule Based Value Investment

* Value in Emerging Markets

Value investing typically refers to the process of selecting single
name stocks. Investors employ a variety of methods to determine and
analyze a company's true "value" using factors such as book value,
price-to-earnings and book-to-market ratio. There are many books on
value investing, so the author chooses to have this book focus on
value investing within the emerging markets.

Emerging markets' returns experience a greater skewness and kurtosis
than developed market returns. This means that when a crisis occurs
and markets go down, they do so in a particularly dramatic fashion.
Monetary interventions are typically more frequent for emerging market
countries. Momentum is of limited use in this situation because it
does not take into account the impact of monetary intervention to the
market prices. Another concern is that liquidity can be limited in
emerging markets, leading to prices being unreliable, bid/ask spreads
widening, and the cost of exiting heightening.

Instead of using historical price data, rules based on macroeconomic
fundamentals are applied to both currencies and hard currency
denominated sovereign bonds, the two more liquid instruments in
emerging markets. The analysis in this chapter looks at each country's
growth, inflation, debt level, and interest rates to select good carry
and credit worthiness.

*Credit default swaps* can be thought of an insurance policies for bond
 holders. Suppose an investor holds a portfolio of illiquid bonds for
 an emerging market economy yielding 6% and there is a political
 event, such as an election, that creates temporary
 uncertainty. Rather the incur the expense of liquidating the
 portfolio, the investor can buy a CDS as protection for a premium of
 2% to keep the principal safe in the event of a default over the next
 one or two years. This means that the premium, often called the
 spread, of a CDS can be viewed as a live risk indicator for a
 specific credit market.

* Value Investing in Emerging Market FX

Outside of equities, such as in the foreign exchange and bond markets,
"value" no longer has a straight-forward definition. The true value of
a bond in literal terms means its future real bond yield, or rather,
bond yield minus inflation. This value also depends on the credit risk
of the bond and inflation. In foreign exchange, value often means the
"fair value" given by purchasing power parity. "Value investing" here
means that instead of choosing companies that are fundamentally
undervalued, you use the rules to select countries that have the
greatest fundamental potential for currency appreciation and bond
returns.

In emerging markets, high economic growth doesn't necessarily coupled
to a strong domestic stock market. Currency appreciation is a superior
alternative that is strongly correlated with growth. As a country
grows, it attracts an influx of capital. The correlation between
emerging market GDP growth and currency appreciation is 21% on
average, whereas the correlation with emerging market equity indices
is -6%.

* Rule Based Investment in Emerging Market FX

Select 10 countries to invest against the USD. The author chooses
Brazil, Hungary, Indonesia, and a handful of others. Analogous to the
carry strategies in chapter 2, the monthly investment rule is to buy
fixed dollar amounts of emerging country currencies via one-month
currency forwards. The return of each currency will be the spot
appreciation plus the interest rate differential between the EM
currencies and the USD.

Many emerging market currencies don't have a tradable forward market
due to capital control and convertibility issues. For these
currencies, non-deliverable forward markets (NDF) have been developed
and are traded offshore. The major difference between deliverable and
NDF markets is that the latter is settled in cash and no physical
delivery takes place.

Return characteristics of EM are different than G10 currencies. From
January '01 to Januarty '13, EM currencies delivered on average close
to double the returns of G10 currencies. They are more negatively
skewed and have a larger kurtosis, i.e. they have a greater frequency
of negative returns and extreme movement than G10 currencies.


#+DOWNLOADED: screenshot @ 2022-09-03 16:07:31
[[file:Rule_Based_Investment_in_Emerging_Market_FX/2022-09-03_16-07-31_screenshot.png]]

* Fundamental Rules

Determining the intrinsic value of a currency can be done in many
ways. This portion of the chapter focuses on 3 key macro-economic
variables of an economy: growth, inflation, and the level of
short-term interest rates.

Rather than build a statistical model, the book employ's a basic
ranking system. Each country is ranked according to its GDP growth,
inflation, and short-term interest rates. On a monthly basis, you can
buy the upper half of the countries at the top of the list.

You don't go short or sell any currencies that rank in the bottom. The
reason is that the emerging market currencies here all have higher
interest rates than the USD. If you were to short these currencies,
you would have negative carry, meaning that you would have to pay to
hold that position.

Use GDP growth and inflation numbers from 6 months prior to determine
the investment for the upcoming month. For short-term rates, it is the
rate of the rate of the previous month used in the study.

Each month, you rank all 10 EM countries into 3 lists according to
their GDP growth, inflation, and short-term rates. You buy and hold
those currencies (against USD) for the top 5 ranked countries in each
of the lists through one-month forwards. Each currency has an equal
dollar amount invested at the beginning of the month.

Here are the results:


#+DOWNLOADED: screenshot @ 2022-09-03 16:21:38
[[file:Fundamental_Rules/2022-09-03_16-21-38_screenshot.png]]

We can also average the 3 macro rankings (GDP growth, inflation, and short-term rates).


#+DOWNLOADED: screenshot @ 2022-09-03 16:22:49
[[file:Fundamental_Rules/2022-09-03_16-22-49_screenshot.png]]

* Technical Rules: Overlaying Credit Default Swap Spread as Market Indicator

Let's look at another risk indicator particularly relevant for
investing in individual emerging countries: Sovereign Credit Default
Swap. SCDS provides protection against the credit risk of a country's
sovereign bonds -- it is insurance for bond holders afraid of a
default.

Generally speaking, market makers, so-called "sell-side" are the
principal buyers and sellers to CDS to hedge their portfolios and
illiquid risk. Hedge funds and mutual funds ("buy-side") use short CDS
positions to go long a credit mainly because of the superior funding
terms and they use long CDS positions to avoid the hassles of selling
a bond.

Sovereign CDS spreads can be used to read the market's expectation of
the credit worthiness of a country.

If one country's CDS spread deteriorates dramatically over the
previous month, you avoid investing in that country's currency in the
upcoming month. For the purpose of this exercise, spreads of more than
20% are defined as dramatic.

A SCDS spread serves as a risk indicator for each individual EM
country, as opposed to VIX, which serves as a general risk indicator
for the global financial markets.

Applying the CDS filtering rule achieves a higher return than the
equally weighted portfolio and a comparable return to the
fundamental/macro strategy:


#+DOWNLOADED: screenshot @ 2022-09-03 18:11:45
[[file:Technical_Rules:_Overlaying_Credit_Default_Swap_Spread_as_Market_Indicator/2022-09-03_18-11-45_screenshot.png]]

* Combining Fundamental Rules and Risk Indicators

Each month you select the top 5 countries from the macro/fundamental
ranking system. If any of the 5 countries' CDS spreads have risen more
than 20% over the past month, you don't invest in its currency in the
upcoming month. The capital is reallocated to the remaining
currencies. If none of the countries passes the CDS filter, you
allocate the capital to the U.S. money markets for that month.

This strategy does the best:

#+DOWNLOADED: screenshot @ 2022-09-03 18:14:25
[[file:Combining_Fundamental_Rules_and_Risk_Indicators/2022-09-03_18-14-25_screenshot.png]]

* Value Investing in Emerging Market Sovereign Bonds

There are 2 types of debts issued by sovereigns of emerging markets:
local currency denominated and hard currency denominated. Although
both types of debts are subject to their particular sovereign credit
risk, the returns of local currency denominated debt are subject to
additional currency risk for USD-based investors and are inherently
more volatile.

For example, bonds issued by Brazil can be denominated in the
Brazilian Real or in the US Dollar. If the Real appreciates against
the dollar, then a dollar-based investor's return is the bond return
plus the currency gain. There is also legal risk of different
jurisdictions; local bonds are subject to local laws, whereas hard
currency bonds are subject to international law.

We will again consider a simple ranking strategy to determine which
countries bonds are worth investing in, focusing on the
macro/fundamental ranking first and then complementing those returns
with the forward-looking components of a sovereign CDS spread filter.

Contrary to the EM FX, which lacks an obvious benchmark, JP Morgan's
Emerging Market Bond Index (EMBI) is the clear choice for hard
currency bonds.

* Fundamental Rules

The fundamental based investment strategy for emerging market hard
currency bonds is similar to that for EM currencies. The ranking
system uses GDP growth, debt to GDP, and inflation as indicators.

To be conservative, the data from 6 months prior is used to determine
the coming month's ranking.

#+DOWNLOADED: screenshot @ 2022-09-03 18:29:12
[[file:Fundamental_Rules/2022-09-03_18-29-12_screenshot.png]]

Combining all 3 fundamentals by averaging the ranking, the result is:

- annualized return of 6.44%
- Sharpe Ratio of 0.84

Decent decrease in risk in exchange for slightly less return.

* Technical Rules

SCDS spread is the market's expectation of a country's credit
worthiness. As we did with currencies, a CDS filtering rule can be
applied to the bond investment universe. The CDS rule is that you buy
only those bonds with a CDS spread that has not deteriorated more than
a certain threshold (~20% arbitrarily) over the past given month.

This results in a change of:

- 9.12% annualized return
- 1.36 Sharpe Ratio

very good!

* Combination of Macro Fundamentals and Market Indicator

Each month select the top 5 countries to invest according to their
ranking in GDP, debt to GDP, and inflation and buy those hard currency
denominated sovereign bonds with a CDS spread that has not
deteriorated more than 20% over the past month. Due to this rule,
there will be months where you will want to buy the bonds of less than
5 countries. In this case, redistribute the risk to the remaining
countries. If all 5 countries are a no, put the money into money markets.

- annualized return of 9.33%
- Sharpe Ratio of 1.40

nice!

Choosing a 50/50 emerging market foreign exchange strategy and emerging market bonds strategy achieved:

- annualized net return of 11.9%
- Sharpe Ratio of 1.73

* Some Remarks

Professional investors specializing in emerging markets often employ
much more complex models in attempt to capture higher returns. Both
the fundamental/backward looking and technical/forward looking aspect
of this strategy can be refined and improved upon for superior
returns.

Many quantitative models incorporate credit ratings and many ratios
have been used to better forecast the sovereign credit spread such as:

- current account over GDP
- reserves over imports
- imports over GDP
- real exchange rate

For looking forward:

- The VIX remains a valid risk indicator
- the TED spread as an indicator of global liquidity
